---
layout: default
title: Substance Abuse
permalink: '16.html'
---

"He who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being a man."

-Samuel Johnson

This is the epigraph of *Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas* by Hunter S. Thompson, where it alludes to the obscene psychedelic indulgence that propels the ensuing narrative. However, drug addiction and abuse is a uniquely human trait, humans being the only species with observed patterns of chemical habituation \[[citation needed](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Citation_needed)\]. The pattern clearly has a double-edge. Addiction encapsulates both the human capacity for self-harm, when it perseveres to the detriment of the organism, as well as the capacity for passion, for this wreckless attachment proves an exceptional tenacity and desire. Perhaps this is why the drinker and the smoker make for such common tropes in narrative. Addiction can function as a kind of reified tragic flaw, a fateful character trait prepackaged and of use in variegated scenarios. Storytellers are addicted to addiction, however, this fascination is wholly justified.

In addiction we encounter the "pineal gland", which Descarte theorized to be the locus of interaction between mind and body. In addiction the disjunction between subject and object is apparently bridged as the subject comes to rely on an object. The subject literally ingests the object, and so constitutes a subject/object hybrid. The real tragedy, however, is that there is no "pineal gland", addiction is not a path to the "fullness of being", but the brutal repetition of the subject's distance from its object.

`v-0.0.1`
