---
layout: default
title: Retcon
permalink: '10.html'
---

"There is a paradox in the idea of transformation. If a transformation is deep-seated enough, it might also transform the very criteria by which we could identify it, thus making it unintelligible to us. But if it is intelligible, it might be because the transformation was not radical enough. If we can talk about the change then it is not full-blooded enough; but if it is full-blooded enough, it threatens to fall outside our comprehension. Change must presuppose continuity— a subject to whom the alteration occurs— if we are not to be left merely with two incommensurable states; but how can such continuity be compatible with revolutionary upheaval?"

-Eagleton, Terry. Figures of Dissent. Verso Books. 246. Print.

Such a transformation as Eagleton describes is a transformation of history itself, a change that alters and rewrites events in the past so that they can be compatible with the transformed present and its trajectory. There are words for this phenonemon; in German, *Nachträglichkeit*, in French, *après-coup*, words to describe the phenomenon of a defered event, a
n act that is performed in reverse. I argue that in English that we have a synonmous word, "retcon", a neologism that contracts "retroactive continuity" and is conventionally used to describe canonical changes in fictional universes.

What is described by these words is a radical break with inertia that comes full circle and reconstitutes the broken. The future is concieved of as a heterogeneous onslaught, rather as than an incremental and iterative process of appending to the present. From the vantage point of the new future a new past can be seen. The thinker that has pioneered this "positing of the presuppositions" is Slajov Žižek in his claims that it was Hegel who pioneered the notion:

"Hegel’s dialectic itself is not yet another grand teleological narrative, but precisely an effort to avoid the narrative illusion of a continuous process of organic growth of the New out of the Old; the historical forms which follow one another are not successive figures within the same teleological frame, but successive re-totalizations, each of them creating ('positing') its own past (as well as projecting its own future)."

-Žižek, Slavoj. Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of Dialectical Materialism. Norton. 272-273. Kindle Edition.

History itself is then subject to a series of edits, and, crucially, these edits are not cuts and tarries wrought by some Gnostic God polluting the universe with their idiosyncrasies. Žižek's reading of Hegel attempts to show that retconning is entirely symbiotic with the formation of traditional linear narratives, i.e., the past is never transparently what it was but always already a product of what it has become.

`0.0.1`
