---
layout: default
title: Dualism
permalink: '3.html'
---

While symbols can be easily linked to one another, it is problematic to link them to the substances that they purport to represent. There is a conceptual divide between theory and practice, description and material, form and substance, the examplar of which the Cartesian mind/body problem:

"Of course, the body *does* exist without the mind and presumably without the person, when the body is a corpse. This consideration, if accepted, would already show that a person and his body are distinct.(See David Wiggins, 'On Being at the Same Place at the Same Time', Philosophical Review, Vol. 77 (1968), pp. 90-5.)"

-Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity. Paperback Edition. Blackwell Publishing, 1981. 144-145. Print.

In *On Being at the Same Place at the Same Time* Wiggins makes the following claim:

"The 'is' of material constitution is not the 'is' of identity."

Wiggins' thesis on 'isness' hinges on the separate domains of rational deduction and empirical evidence. An identity expresses a self-equality that bears an irreversible symbolic consistency, whereas a material condition is contingent and it could at any time be proven to be otherwise. I.e., we can make a sharp distinction between composition and identification. Even as an entity is the sum of its parts the entity is not to be confused with such a sum, for its identity is made possible by the function that is applied to the parts, their summation. The containing abstraction is then a curious kind of superset wherein one of the elements is a function of the origional set.

Yet while the identity function is deductive in theory, the referent of an identification cannot actually be deduced. If this were the case then names would not require context or definition, they would somehow imminently possess their meaning in their lexemes as is possible with conjunctions and portmanteaus. Identification is a unique operation that is neither deductive nor inductive. An identification is a logical null function, it swallows predicates, and it depends on no features in the referent. To capture this notion I turn to Verbosium:

"Identification, then, is an invisible skin that sheaths the named world. When that skin is wounded we know not what bleeds before our senses because it bears no relation to the skin. This leaves the mind/body divide as a matter for faith to settle. Whether a person vacates their body as soul or memory is arbitrary, their identity was merely a facade."

-Verbosium, Johannes. The Time Suit. Pychon Press, 1975. 202. Print.

`v-0.1.2`
