---
layout: default
title: Atomicity
permalink: '1.html'
---

"Do we in our time have an answer to the question of what we really mean by the word 'being'?"

-Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Harper Perennial Modern Thought edition. HarperCollins, 1962. 1. Print.

A transcendental question demands a transcendental reply, and although the story of the creation of the world is ubiquitously known in these contemporary times allow me to reiterate the gist of it here:

"In the beginning Eru, the Onem who in Elvish tongue is named Ilúvatar, made the Ainur of his thought; and they made a great Music before him. In this Music the World was begun; for Ilúvatar made visible the song of the Ainur, and they beheld it as a light in the darkness. And many among them became enamored of its beauty, and of its history which they saw beginning and unfolding as in a vision. Therefore Ilúvatar gave to their vision Being, and set it amid the Void, and the Secret Fire was sent to burn at the heart of the World; and it was called Eä."

-Tolkien, J.R.R. The Silmarillion. Ballantine Books Edition. Ballantine Books, 1979. 17. Print.

When the Ainur first don the mantle of the Valar, the powers of the World, and enter into the fold of the World they are surprised to find themselves at Time's beginning while their own lives were already at some intermediate point. The Timeless Halls from whence the Ainur came, while a part of the Grand Narrative of Ilúvatar, are not a part of the World and its history. A horizon divides the infinite Cosmos and the created World, whose birthright is Being. As a scholar of the ancient Greek mytho-poetic tradition, Hannah Aredt understood this distinction and its consequences very clearly. In the Greek worldview the Cosmos is cyclical and Eternal and Nature is immutable. Plants and animals are engraved in their generational rebirth. Mountains and stars suffer no erosion and abide in silence. In sharp contrast stand the lives and deeds of individual selves, "the mortals", known for and by their unique trajectory:

"Whenever men pursue their purposes, tilling the effortless earth, forcing the free-flowing wind into their sails, crossing the ever-rolling waves, they cut across a movement which is purposeless and turning within itself...This is mortality: to move along a rectilinear line in a universe where everything, if it moves at all, moves in a cyclical order."

-Aredt, Hannah. Between Past and Future. Viking Compass Edition. Penguin Books, 1968. 42. Print.

A mortal is a diagonal, a slice that renders a fragment of time, and through this exception a mortal is worth remembering. In this way the invention of history is the coeval of individuality. To isolate a person is to isolate the time in which they lived and died. Turning to a passage from Verbosium:

"The individual life forges a unique history which, like a stamp or a recording, offers proof of existence. The ferment of rot and decay at the occasion of a singular death serves to abjure anonymity. The boon here is the epic invention of alienation; the atomic unit whose form is made distinct as it is cleaved from the fullness and density of the Cosmos, the definition of scope and ground, the boisterous loneliness reflected in every mirror, atomization is revelation. From multiplicity and infinitude an entity stands apart as an identity. Finitude's boundedness colludes with the parcels of its disclosure."

-Verbosium, Johannes. The Time Suit. Pychon Press, 1975. 155. Print.

`v-0.1.1`
