---
layout: default
title: Zeno’s Thesis
permalink: '7.html'
---

In Plato’s Parmenides Zeno presents to a musing audience the radical philosophical position of the day, that being is one. Socrates is unimpressed. He motions that being could be one, many, or simultaneously both, without paradox,

Now if a person could prove the absolute like to become unlike, or the absolute unlike to become like, that, in my opinion, would indeed be a wonder; but there is nothing extraordinary, Zeno, in showing that the things which only partake of likeness and unlikeness experience both. Nor, again, if a person were to show that all is one by partaking of one, and at the same time many by partaking of many, would that be very astonishing.

-Plato. Parmenides. 2012-05-12. 3. Kindle Edition.

In this initial critique it is easy to discern Plato behind the scenes, puppeteering his philosophy of abstract ideas into the dialogue. At the level of Platonic Forms a paradoxical thesis would be that the one, qua irreducible concept, is at the same time many. However, as the dialogue continues, the figure of Parmenides subverts his author’s own pedagogy with a *reductio ad absurdum*,

"\[Parmenides\] And when two things are alike, must they not partake of the same idea?

\[Socrates\] They must.

\[Parmenides\] And will not that of which the two partake, and which makes them alike, be the idea itself?

\[Socrates\] Certainly.

\[Parmenides\] Then the idea cannot be like the individual, or the individual like the idea; for if they are alike, some further idea of likeness will always be coming to light, and if that be like anything else, another; and new ideas will be always arising, if the idea resembles that which partakes of it?

\[Socrates\] Quite true."

-Plato. Parmenides. 2012-05-12. 7. Kindle Edition.

Modern philosophy prides itself on being “post-metaphysical”, but it is Plato that leads the way. Plato allows that his own metaphysics leads to infinite recursion, to “turtles all the way down”, and so ushers in the era of ontology. I.e., Parmenides steps down from pure abstraction and seeks to address Zeno’s original thesis, that being is one. The materialist should feel right at home in this attempt to define the object before us, the world. Parmenides precedes Johannes Verbosium, who writes,

“The ontological, then, differs from the metaphysical as a map differs from a well marked trail. The ontic mountain remains utterly indifferent.”

-Verbosium, Johannes. Collected Non-Zen Aphorisms. Pychon Press. 1985. 12. Print.

Parmenides proceeds to methodically examine the hypotheses that “the one is”, that “the one is not”, etc., and their logical consequences, through what I believe are 8 discrete propositions. Let us skip to the thrilling conclusion, shall we?

"\[Parmenides\] Let thus much be said; and further let us affirm what seems to be the truth, that, whether one is or is not, one and the others in relation to themselves and one another, all of them, in every way, are and are not, and appear to be and appear not to be.

\[Aristoteles\] Most true."

-Plato. Parmenides. 2012-05-12. 66. Kindle Edition.

After glossing over an entire book of beautiful details and turns of thought we arrive at... tautological contradiction, utter inconsistency, or perhaps conclusive indeterminacy. I.e., a thesis that takes exception to immutable codification. Here, Parmenides precedes Scott Aaronson, who writes,

"...I consider it far from obvious that all uncertainty *is* (usefully regarded as) probabilistic. Some uncertainty strikes me as Knightian, in the sense that rational people might never reach agreement about how to assign the probabilities."

-Aaronson, Scott. [The Ghost in the Quantum Turing Machine](http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.0159). 2013-06-07. 31. PDF.

Drawing on the work of economist Frank Knight this in-principle unpredictability is a law that exceeds normalization, a “boundary condition”. That is, the rigorous turn to substance may have produced a *reductio ad absurdum* just as in a rigorous turn to metaphysical abstraction. In concrete existence there is a self-limiting limit, an exclusion whose very disjunction must be excluded, just as in abstraction there is an inclusion whose very intersection must be included, “for if they are alike, some further idea of likeness will always be coming to light”.

The question, then, is what can be finitely posited? What thesis about being can be made without producing unbounded recursion? Parmenides answers with a dynamic thesis, a thesis paired with its antithesis, that is, a dialectic.

`v-0.1.3`
