---
layout: default
title: Ideas
permalink: '6.html'
---

"I fear that the world will perish before I do, and that I will be swallowed up into oblivion at the same instant as an apocalypse around me. Then there would be no difference between my personal death and the absolute reign of death, the very notion of Death. I would not merely end, I would be the end, and what horror."

-Verbosium, Johannes. The Journals of Johannes Verbosium. Pychon Press, 1988. 60. Print.

When I first encountered this quote I understood only the crude harping on finitude, the brutal existentialist awakening, the undying consciousness of death. Yet this rigmorale of mortal whining is what Verbosium avoids, Verbosium has envisioned an encounter with the essence of oblivion. A year or more passed before I associated this with Hegel's concept of the concrete universal, a point of intersection between particulate substance and its abstract, pseudo-Platonic, Universal Idea, and even then I could intuit that I was still missing the point.

In Plato's *Parmenides* a curious subversion takes place whereby Socrates, qua mouthpiece for the Platonic Idea, is subjected to a critical dialogue by the character of Parmenides. Socrates is undone by his own method. In the course of the dialogue a question is posed that is exactly that of the concrete universal, how do things partake of their Idea? How can a pure form collude with its empirical ostension? By analyzing the Ideas and their relationship to tangible objects Plato brings his own core philosophy into question, a move endorsed by Parmenides:

"I think that you should go a step further, and consider not only the consequences which flow from a given hypothesis, but also the consequences which flow from denying the hypothesis..."

-Plato. Parmenides. 2012-05-12. 11. Kindle Edition.

This is a cute trick that actually exacts the same horror as Verbosium's poetic fear, this is negation in and for itself. This is to go full circle to the death of death, if we want to know what death is. What is sublime is that there is in fact a coincidence between Ideas and matter. This commonality is their negation. That is, even the Absolute can be obliterated, and this is how it meets with the contingent.

`v-0.1.1`
