---
layout: default
title: It's Raining
---

I have been personally fascinated for some time by the essay *It's raining (somewhere)* by François Recanati. At first my fascination was the symptom of a type of culture shock. The essay expends all of its efforts on the analysis of a single mote of language, the simple sentence "It's raining". The benefits of this approach I thought I understood, an argument confined to a rigid and concrete scope could better succeed at grounding its own formalization. The "wow" was because it was the first time that I had fully encountered such a microscopic style of philosophy and it seemed obsessive and insane. Previously I had mostly read world consuming salvos in the Hegelian vein or existentialist poetics in the anti-Hegelian vein.

These days I have read enough of the Anglo-Saxon Analytic school to find its obsession and madness just as palatable as the obsession and madness of German Idealism with its grand metaphysical works, yet my fascination with *It's raining (somewhere)* persists. I think I can account for this personal obsession in philosophical rather than biographical terms.

Recanati's take on the sentence "It's raining" is unique among his peers. The sentence, he claims, implies a place and yet this implicature is not a component of the sentence. It could be the case that "It's raining" is a fragment, the sentence could require a place to be provided, but this is not linguistically necessitated. The sentence then has meaning that exceeds its semantic construction. For Recanati this meaning is pragmatically inferred. That is, we know from experience that for rain to happen it must happen somewhere, even though we do not say as much.

>According to my proposal, the sentence ‘it is raining’ means something very simple and very close to the surface: that a rain event is taking place, or (equivalently) that there is rain. No place is mentioned by the sentence as the place where that event occurs. Of course there must be such a place : an event can only occur at a particular place (and a particular time). This is a metaphysical fact about events, which holds whether the event is a raining event or a dancing event or a kissing event.

-Recanati, François. "It's raining (somewhere)." Linguistics and Philosophy. 30 (2007): 129. Print.

What is amazing here is that without ever departing from the brilliantly simple, Recanati's argument arrives at a sublime metaphysical vista. Arising from an elementary unit of English is a "(somewhere)", an unspecified place that is a logically required stopgap. Hinted at is an openness, as though the rain refused to sign the contract that would bind it to a particular patch of Earth. Recanati even outlines a process that he suggestively terms "free enrichment" whereby the site of the rain is optionally provided.

Folowing Recanati's analysis, the sentence "It's raining", while being itself limited in scope, points to a strictly unlimited entity, an abstract place that is not any actually existing place but rather the horizion of all places. This sounds like the Kantian *a priori* category of Space, and it is pleasant to uncover a transcendental notion in the midst of such an unassuming meteorological statement. My fascination with Recanati's essay stems from its presentation of a proper Kantian Sublime, an unbounded and untamed (somewhere), a fantastic storm that rains neither here nor there.