---
layout: default
title: Atomic
---

> Do we in our time have an answer to the question of what we really mean by the word 'being'?

-Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Harper Perennial Modern Thought edition. HarperCollins, 1962. 1. Print.

A transcendental question demands a transcendental reply. Although the story of the creation of the world is ubiquitously known in these contemporary times, allow me to reiterate the gist of it here:

> In the beginning Eru, the Onem who in Elvish tongue is named Ilúvatar, made the Ainur of his thought; and they made a great Music before him. In this Music the World was begun; for Ilúvatar made visible the song of the Ainur, and they beheld it as a light in the darkness. And many among them became enamored of its beauty, and of its history which they saw beginning and unfolding as in a vision. Therefore Ilúvatar gave to their vision Being, and set it amid the Void, and the Secret Fire was sent to burn at the heart of the World; and it was called Eä.

-Tolkien, J.R.R. The Silmarillion. Ballantine Books Edition. Ballantine Books, 1979. 17. Print.

What is of interest in the recounting of the creation of the world is that it does not begin at the beginning of the World, but rather with a timeless precedent. When the Ainur first take on the mantle of the Valar, the powers of the World, and enter into its fold, they are surprised to find themselves at Time's beginning. The beginning of Time is definitively and hygienically demarcated by the beginning of the World. A horizon now divides the infinite Cosmos from the created World, and at the Center of this creation there is a singular Enigma that is identified as Eä, the heart of Being.

What this means for those of us that live within the world, and therefore within time, is that mortality is the modality of existence. The Timeless Halls, while a part of history's Grand Narrative, are not a part of the World. Scholars of the Greeks understand this very clearly. In the Greek worldview the Cosmos is cyclical and Eternal, Nature is immutable. The outlook here is that species do not change or evolve. Plants and animals are fungible parts that can be completely replaced by each successive generation. Mountains and stars suffer no erosion and abide in an everlasting silence. In sharp contrast stand the lives and deeds of individual selves, "the mortals", known for and by their unique trajectory:

> Whenever men pursue their purposes, tilling the effortless earth, forcing the free-flowing wind into their sails, crossing the ever-rolling waves, they cut across a movement which is purposeless and turning within itself...This is mortality: to move along a rectilinear line in a universe where everything, if it moves at all, moves in a cyclical order.

-Aredt, Hannah. Between Past and Future. Viking Compass Edition. Penguin Books, 1968. 42. Print.

The individual life is opposed to the natural cycle, the timeless rotation of the universe. The ferment of rot and decay becomes the occasion of a death. Interrupting and extending blossoming life is human life, those creatures whose existence cannot be subsumed into their species, nor into the unified tributaries of the natural forces, and whose boisterous loneliness is reflected in every mirror.

It is from this concept of mortality that Greek civilization arrived at the concept of the atom. It is in the Greek mytho-poetic tradition that an acute awareness of perishability is a scientific measurement, the definition of scope and grounds. Finitude's boundedness colludes with the parcels of its disclosure.

The boon here is the invention of alienation, the atomic unit whose form is made distinct as it is cleaved from the fullness and density of the Cosmos. Atomization is revelation. A discrete segment, divorced from fluid confusion, can acquire limits that are possible to declare, and therefore, can expose features, behaviors, and axioms that can be known. From multiplicity and infinitude an entity stands apart, and it is, and what it is is itself.
