---
layout: default
title: State Change
permalink: '0.html'
---

*Is it now?*

I am not ashamed to admit that I enjoy romantic rhetoric; the sort of tawdry yearing whose pathos usually sounds maudlin to our modern palate; a palate accustomed to raw obscenity or sterile clarity. There is something antique about depth. There is something presumptuous about allotting a certian courtesy to the Void.

This is why I still turn to books, why I still burn and sweat and stagger (in a properly modern fugue) after illusions. It was this morning that an inner rampage brought me down a street I rarely tread and into a dusty shop whose name remains as murky as the guts of its shelves. For a quarter of an hour or so I blindly meandered the crooked alleyways of the shop without much interest. It was as I was about to leave that I saw a slim volume by Johannes Verbosium precariously dangling from the step of a stepladder. Something took ahold of me. In effortless unconsciousness my hands delved to the cash register and carried Verbosium's essay *On Timelessness* out the door.

Verbosium, writing as science sent a shockwave through the romantic spirit, is like a hallucinogenic artifact. His otherness is insistent like a small clue to an undiscovered order. Ahead of his era of pulp sci fi Verbosium's interest in time lies not with history, but rather with time's abstract formula:

"At the time of writing, time travel is relegated to whatever contrivances can be safely applied in fiction. This fact liberates the philosophical mind from the costly consideration of several taxing paradoxes. E.g. 'Can I father myself?' Rather than foolishly dwelling on the outright manipulation of time I aim to unveil the secret's of time's dilation, a phenomenon that certainly merits the most rigorous analysis."

-Verbosium, Johannes. The Time Suit. Pychon Press, 1955. 12. Print.

Verbosium goes on unpack the phenomenon of time's occasional stuttering. The disruption, while inhabiting time in whatever way we do, in which a particular moment arrests subjective attention with a climactic force.  There is the sense that time has "stopped". He writes:

"A sharp division is formed between the importance of the moment and the muted layer of routine from which it arose. A sudden fragment of vital life bleeds through the dusty and worn garments of the canonical day. In some circles this moment is considered affluent, it has been celebrated as inspiration or revelation and exalted above ordinary modes of perception, yet this exceptional instant is utterly fungible. The moment is captured, domesticated. Its possibilities are foreclosed. It is too late for the moment to be anything other than what it is and too soon for it to become anything else. The moment takes on a duality, at once an evanescent bloom and a reified closure. This portentous slice actually falls out of the temporal continuum entirely. The moment does not really happen at all."

-Verbosium, 148.

In Zeno's paradox motion is infinitely subdivided into an infinite series of sub-movements that asymptotically approach a finite point without ever arriving. An atomized "instance" of space has been wrought from space's natural continuity. This reduction continues *ad infinitum* until we are left with spans of space so minuscule that they can be effectively accounted for as having no territory at all. That is, there is in between two states an effective statelessness. It would serve well to reiterate the words of Parmenides:

"The instant seems to signify something such that changing occurs from it to each of two states. For a thing doesn’t change from rest while rest continues, or from motion while motion continues. Rather, this queer creature, the instant, lurks between motion and rest— being in no time at all— and to it and from it the moving thing changes to resting and the resting thing changes to moving."

-Plato. The Dialogues of Plato, Vol. 4, trans. B. Jowett. Oxford University Press, 1892. 156d-e.

This may be metaphysical fancy, unintelligible to any self-respecting servant of modern pragmatism, but it does account for the state of the world as we find it when the light is just so. Such conditions have been well documented in the bowed glow of fall or the pale blue of pre-dawn. As Verbosium writes:

"It is in the indirect light of an echo, an allusion, or exclusion that we glimpse the fragmentary being of a moment. What the moment *is* is only the echo of the moment's vanishing and as such the present is an illusion, a mirage between past and future, and this is precisely why the moment's suspense is such fertile ground for our own existence. Neither manifested nor redacted, it is raw existential presence untethered to any actually existing thing."

-Verbosium, 148.

v-0.1.2
