# Anti-Delirium

This essay is intended to be a critique of a set of "Deleuzian", "schizoanalytic", trends in contemporary thought, it is to be my Anti-Anti-Oedipus.

"He who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being a man." - Dr. Johnson

By raw chance, both *Anti-Oedipus* and *Fear and Loathing* were published in 1972, although *Fear and Loathing* had first been serialized in *Rolling Stone Magazine* in 1971. In their own ways both books appropriate madness and proceed to wage war against the hegemonic culture of their place and time. Crucially, Hunter S. Thompson grasps the tragicomedy of his position. In *Anti-Oedipus*, Deleuze and Guattari forge a romanticized schizophrenia, a "schizoanalysis", that is utterly doomed by the weight of its own aspirations. That is, HST, with the simple gesture of the epigraph that I have borrowed, evinces at once the motive and futility for his preferred form of madness. Meanwhile, Deleuze and Guattari are under the impression that they have sketched out a way forward. *Anti-Oedipus* is at heart a manifesto, and as such, it forgoes the quixotic for the hopeful, i.e., the puritanical. The Deleuzian view is not liberating, but dogmatic.

The failure of schizoanalysis is, beautifully, immanent to the doctrine itself. Schizoanalysis is flawed by its own standard of measurement. To be fair, the problematics that are confronted by this approach are difficult. *Anti-Oedipus* justifies itself as an attack on edifices of modern metaphysics and metapsychology. This is because in the radical doubt of the moderns, the Cartesians, the Kantians, the aim of skepticism was always return to certainty. This observation does not invalidate the process of doubt, but it illuminates a presupposition of skepticism, it shows that something was left unscathed by doubt. This hidden article of faith was the law of identity, that is skepticism sought the kind of absolute certainty that it believed to be possible, and it sought this certainty on the basis of the self-evidence of a thing's identity with itself. Skepticism, in its wielding of the law of identity, precludes otherness and reinforces difference. The Deleuzian project is then, at first blood, an answer to the castles and fortresses that were constructed by reason, it is not merely a deconstructive, but a demolishonist undertaking.

Schizoanalysis is combative because it must be. It declares its enemy to be fascism, and what's more, the very concept of fascism.Furthermore, schizoanalysis finds the intellectual inheritance to be lacking in weapons, stilted as it is by its own fascism, a slavery to the authority of sameness, homogeneity, and purity of identity. Given this context, schizoanalysis wages a battle on two fronts, a battle against the grand tradition of critical continental philosophy, and a battle against the fomenting fascism of the 20th century. Its unlikely, and tenuous ally, becomes capitalism. And this is where schizoanalysis begins to break down.

Deleuze formulates an ontology of multiplicity, of strata, and of sets, the so-called "body without organs". This ontology is constructed in order to create a permissive space for desire and thought, rather that sealing identity against otherness, otherness is taken to be immanent to identity, as any identity is enumerable rather than discrete. Things appear as parts of a series, rather than as atomic substances. This ontology is intended to be description of fluidity, and it posits its own undoing in the form of an idealized substratum.

This is because Deleuze misunderstands the radicality of death. In the instance of the body without organs, a pure vacuity is taken as a positive ontological entity. This is intended as a wildly subsersive move, an ontology that will sunder being from the constrictions of identity by introducing a being that is without identity, that is utterly not itself. Unfortunately, this notion of a pure void is strictly Kantian, i.e., it exists well within the bounds of critical theory, and carries all of the associated baggage. To borrow Hegelian terminology, what Deleuze wanted to theorize was determinate negation, but what was actually theorized was abstract negation.

Abstract negation is "pure", universal negation, the assertion of a Void in essence that is made possible by universal laws. Determinate negation is "contaiminated", historical negation, it is the contigent breakdown and failure of an existential particular. The first notion is that of death "in of itself", the second notion is death as it occurs to the living organism. Schizoanaylsis, despite its effort to break free of dogmatic absolutes, presupposes an ontology that falls into a familiar trap, the rift between things "in and of themselves" and things as they appear to a subject. The positive Void of schizoanalysis is actually a fascist a Universal!

The contradiction is easy to spot once the Deleuzian gambit is placed into perspective. Schizoanalysis is an attempt to achieve absolute freedom from tyranny, including the "wrath of judgement". That is, schizoanalysis seeks to carve out at a space that cannot be brought under a law, a species without a genus. Paradoxical, such a "postive negativity" is lawless by law, ergo, it is subject to judgement after all.

Deleuze completely misses the true terror/freedom of modernity. It is not Kurtz in the jungle, it is not HST in Las Vegas. And this is because he misses the true horror, it is not the homogeneous fascist bloc. The true terror/freedom of modernity is the preclusion of the future, and the true horror is utter immobility of death, the stasis of purity, whether 0, 1 or many.
